<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en-gb" xml:lang="en-gb">
  <head>
    <!--nomodify-->
    <meta name="style" content="cs" />
    <title>COMS30035 - Machine Learning - Computer Science Department UoB</title>
    <style>
      table { border-spacing: 2px; border-collapse: separate; }
      td { margin: 1px; padding: 5px; }
      table.blank  {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #f1f1f1;}
      td.blank  {vertical-align: top; text-align: center; background: #cccccc;}
      tr.blank  {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #cccccc;}
      td.Rui {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #FFE5B4;}
      td.lecture {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #ccffc1;}
      td.dropin {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #ffaaaa;}
      td.lab {vertical-align: top; text-align: left; background: #bbbbee;}
    </style>
  </head>

  <body>
    <div id="wrap">
      <a href="https://www.ole.bris.ac.uk/ultra/courses/_264170_1/outline">BLACKBOARD PAGE</a> |
      <a href="https://www.bris.ac.uk/unit-programme-catalogue/UnitDetails.jsa?unitCode=COMS30035" target="_blank">UNIT INFO</a> |
      <h1>COMS30035 - Machine Learning</h1>


      <link rel="stylesheet" href="simple.css" />
      <a id="info"></a>
      <hr/>

       <h2>News</h2> 

       <ul>
       </ul>
       
       <hr/>
       
      <h2>Unit Information</h2>

      <p>
	This unit seeks to acquaint students with machine learning
      algorithms which are important in many modern data and computer
      science applications. We cover topics such as kernel machines,
      probabilistic inference, neural networks, HMMs and
      emsemble models.
      </p>


      <hr/>

      <h2> Staff</h2>

      <p>
	<a href="https://jcussens.github.io/"
	   target="_blank">James Cussens (JC)</a>, Xiyue Zhang (XZ),
	     Wei-Hong Li (WL), Xiang Li (XL)
      </p>

      <hr/>

      <h2> Teaching Assistants</h2>

      <p> TBD
      </p>

      <hr/>

      <h2>Unit Materials</h2>

      <p><a href="cribsheet/cribsheet.pdf">Cribsheet</a></p>

<table border="1" style="border-collapse:collapse" cellspacing="1" cellpadding="2">

  <tr>
    <td><i>Week</i></td>
    <td><i>Monday lecture, 0900-1000, St Michaels Hill 31-37 A1.4
	(Weeks 2-5), Queen's 1.4 Pugsley (Weeks 7-8) <br/> <strong>Week
    1 only: moved to Monday 1500-1600, Queen's 1.4 Pugsley</strong></i></td>
    <td><i>Monday lecture, 1500-1600, Queen's 1.4 Pugsley <br/> <strong>Week
    1 only: moved to Tuesday 1200-1300, Queen's 1.4 Pugsley</strong> </i></td>
    <td><i>Tuesday lab, 1500-1800, MVB 2.11</i></td>
    <td><i>Thursday drop-in, 1700-1800, Queen's 1.06</i></td>
  </tr>

  <tr>
    <td>1  (w/c 22/09/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect01/lect01.pdf" target="_blank">L01: Unit organisation</a>,
      <a href="lectures/lect02/lect02.pdf" target="_blank">L02: Machine Learning
	concepts</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect03/lect03.pdf" target="_blank">L03: Unit topic overview</a>,
      <a href="lectures/lect04/lect04.pdf" target="_blank">L04: Linear regression, linear
      discriminant and logistic regression</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab1/lab1-intro_to_numpy_scikitlearn.ipynb" target="_blank">Lab01: Introduction to numpy and scikit learn</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2 (w/c 29/09/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect05/lect05.pdf" target="_blank">L05:
      Introduction to Neural Networks</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect06/lect06.pdf" target="_blank">L06:
      Training Neural Networks</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab2/lab2-neural_nets.ipynb"
      target="_blank">Lab02: Neural networks</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3 (w/c 06/10/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect07/lect07.pdf" target="_blank">L07: Regression and
      classification trees</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect08/lect08.pdf" target="_blank">L08: Kernels and Support
      Vector Machines</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab3/lab3-trees_SVM.ipynb"
	 target="_blank">Lab03: Trees and SVMs</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4 (w/c 13/10/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect09/lect09.pdf" target="_blank">L09: Probabilistic
      Graphical Models</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect10/lect10.pdf" target="_blank">L10: Markov Chain Monte Carlo</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
            <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab4/lab4-Bayesian_Networks_MCMC_PyMC3.ipynb"
	       target="_blank">Lab04: Probabilistic Graphical Models</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5 (w/c 20/10/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect11/lect11.pdf" target="_blank">L11:
      k-means and mixtures of Gaussians</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect12/lect12.pdf" target="_blank">L12: The
      EM algorithm</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab5/lab5-MixtureModels_K-means_Expectation-Maximisation.ipynb" target="_blank">
	Lab05: Mixture models, K-means and Expectation Maximisation</a>
    </td>
        <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6 (w/c 27/10/25) </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td>
      in-class test, time TBD
    </td>
    <td>
      No drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7 (w/c 03/11/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect13/lect13.pdf" target="_blank">L13:
      Sequential data (HMMs)</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect14/lect14.pdf" target="_blank">L14:
      Sequential data (LDS)</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab6/Lab_6_HMM.ipynb" target="_blank">
	Lab06: Hidden Markov Models</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8 (w/c 10/11/25) </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      <a href="lectures/lect15/lect15.pdf" target="_blank">L15:
      Ensemble methods</a>
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      Spare lecture
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035/lab_sheets_public/blob/main/lab7/lab7-trees_and_ensembles.ipynb" target="_blank">
	Lab07: Decision Trees and Ensemble Methods</a>
    </td>
    <td class="dropin">
      Drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9 (w/c 17/11/25) </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      Coursework support session (1500-1700)
    </td>
    <td>
      No drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10 (w/c 24/11/25) </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      Coursework support session (1500-1700)
    </td>
    <td>
      No drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11 (w/c 01/12/25) </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td class="lab">
      Coursework support session (1500-1700)
    </td>
    <td>
      No drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>12 (w/c 08/12/25) </td>
    <td>
      No lecture
    </td>
    <td class="lecture">
      Revision
    </td>
    <td>
      No lab
    </td>
    <td>
      No drop-in
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

      <hr/>

      <h2>Assessment Details</h2>

      <ul>
	<li>
	  If you are doing this unit as a MAJOR (assessment
	unit <a href="https://www.bris.ac.uk/unit-programme-catalogue/UnitDetails.jsa?unitCode=COMS30083">COMS30083</a>)
	then you do a mid-term in-class test (worth 30% of the unit)
	and also coursework during weeks 9-11 (worth 70% of the unit).
	</li>
	<li>
	  If you are doing this unit as a MINOR (assessment
	unit <a href="https://www.bris.ac.uk/unit-programme-catalogue/UnitDetails.jsa?unitCode=COMS30081">COMS30081</a>)
	then you are assessed by the ML questions in the "Topics in Computer Science"
	closed-book exam in December (worth 100% of the unit).
	</li>
      </ul>		

      <hr/>

<h2>Lab Work</h2>
The labs are formative assessements which we strongly encourage you to
complete. Note that these were designed to help your understanding of
ML methods.

<h3>Using the machines in MVB 2.11</h3>

      <p>
	Most (not all) of the software we use in this unit is supplied as Python
	packages bundled with the Anaconda Python package manager. If you are
	using the machines in Queen's 180 to do the lab exercises (as
	opposed to using your own machine) you need to do the
	following to start using Anaconda.
      </p>

      <ol>
	<li>
	  Make sure the machine you are using is running Linux (reboot
	  if necessary). 
	</li>
	<li>
	  Open up a Terminal window so you have access to the Linux
	  command line.
	</li>
	<li>
	  Enter the following at the command line: <code>module load
	    anaconda</code>
	</li>
	<li>
	  To access the ML software for this unit you need to use
	  the <code>coms30035</code> Anaconda Virtual Environment. To
	  do this type <code>conda activate coms30035</code> at the
	  command line. 
	</li>
	<li>
	  If you call Python after doing <code>conda activate
	  coms30035</code> it should use the <code>coms30035</code>
	  virtual environment. Common ways of using Python include:
	  <ol>
	    <li> Typing <code>python</code> at the prompt to start the
	    Python interpreter.
	    </li>
	    <li> Typing <code>python somescript.py</code> to execute a
	    Python script (in this example with the name <code>somescript.py</code>).
	    </li>
	    <li> Typing <code>jupyter lab</code> at the prompt to start JupyterLab.
	    </li>
	    <li> Typing <code>jupyter lab somenotebook.ipynb</code> to
	    inspect (and possibly execute) a
	    JupyterLab notebook (in this example with the name <code>somenotbook.ipynb</code>).
	    </li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
      </ol>
      
      <h3>Using your own machine</h3>
      
      <p>If you want to do lab exercises on your own machine then you
	should
	install <a href="https://www.anaconda.com">Anaconda</a> on
	it. If you run into installation problems then feel free to
	ask the Teaching
	Staff on the unit for help, but we can't guarantee to solve
	them.
      </p>

<h2>Text books</h2>

      <ol>
          <li> <b>Bishop, C. M., Pattern recognition and machine learning (2006)</b>. This is one of the best ML textbooks and will be <u>our main textbook</u>. The book is freely available <a href="https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/people/cmbishop/prml-book/">here</a>.</li>
          <!--<li> Coursework: <b>Code + report</b> 40%</li> -->
          <li> <b>Murphy, K., Probabilistic Machine Learning: An
          Introduction (2022)</b> and <b>Murphy, K., Probabilistic
          Machine Learning: Advanced Topics (2023)</b>. We will also
          use this book series for some topics. These are more recent
          textbooks and provide a particularly good coverage of
          probabilistic methods. The books are freely available via <a href="https://probml.github.io/pml-book/">here</a>.</li>
      </ol>


      <h2>Github</h2>
      <p>All technical resources (including the labs) will be posted on the
        <a href="https://github.com/uob-COMS30035" target="_blank">COMS30035 Github organisation</a>. If you find any issues, please kindly raise an issue in the respective repository.
      </p>

      <hr/>

    </div>
  </body>
</html>
